<!--
.. title: An Origin Story
.. slug: an-origin-story
.. date: 2024-03-06 10:00:00+05:30
.. tags: origin-story,story,storytelling,storywriting,deep-learning,AI/ML,AI,ML,DL,Python
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

It was a chilly evening in January of 2019. I just had dinner in the hostel mess and I am returning to my room. On the way, I received the customary daily phone call from my mom. As usual, she sounds worried about my behavior and career and I try to avoid the conversation.<!-- TEASER_END -->

She is not wrong about her worry though. I was rather careless and ignorant about my studies and my career. I was so careless that I missed a class just because I was lazy even though I would have failed that course as a consequence. (As a side note, I eventually didn't fail that course.) I was so ignorant that I kept watching movies and playing video games even when it was time for me to do an assignment. I also didn't have any goals. So, yes, my mom's worry is justified.

Contrary to every day, I had a change of heart this time because I realized this conversation is in my interest too, considering I am in the final year of my bachelor's. I have to let her speak and stop avoiding this conversation. After all, there is no better person to discuss one's future with than a mother because she is the best well-wisher one can ever have.

By the time I reached my room, she told me about an online course. She apparently got to know about the course from a small news article. She tells me that the course teaches deep learning (DL). It sounded like a learning technique using which I can learn lectures deeply. I don't know what that is, so I asked her. I started to lose my temper because she is suggesting me to do a course in which both of us didn't understand what I would be learning. Before I started shouting, the next piece of information calmed me down. The course will be taught by a couple of professors from IIT Madras, one of the finest engineering institutes in the country. On top of that, the course fee is very low. If I don't like the course, I will lose only a small amount of money and a few hours of my time. If I do, I will find an area of interest and I will learn that from one of the best professors. The potential gain is much more than the potential loss from this course. I was convinced that I should give it a try wholeheartedly. I enrolled in the [course](https://padhai.onefourthlabs.in/courses/dl-feb-2019) on the same day.

The day I eagerly waited for has arrived. I am attending the first session of the course from the comfort of my hostel room. The professors explain the definitions of all the common jargon related to DL. I finally know what deep learning means. To put it very simply, it is one of the advanced areas of Artificial Intelligence (AI). Despite this, I found the session to be quite boring. This could be because I don't believe intelligence can be created in a computer. You can give step-by-step instructions to the computer for a task, but how can we encode intelligence into instructions? Towards the end of the session, I kept thinking to myself, "This is only the first session. Moreover, they taught only the definitions of common terms. It is, of course, boring. I should wait for the next session and see."

A couple of days passed and it was time for the second session. I hesitantly opened the video link for the same. Now, they are teaching the basics of Python programming language. I already learned it more than 3 years ago. I expected it to be boring like the first session. I still gathered some energy to pay attention. After a few minutes into the session, I realized I had forgotten most of what I learned about Python. My attention levels soared. Halfway into the session, they started teaching some basic external libraries like `numpy` and `pandas` which will be useful for implementing DL algorithms. That is entirely new to me. Now, my interest levels also surged.

For a few more sessions, they covered the fundamentals of DL. That included Python, mathematics, setting up a programming environment for lab sessions, implementing basic building blocks of DL, etc. There were ups and downs i.e., some were interesting and some were boring. I still got through all the basic sessions to find out if the main topic would be interesting or not.

Finally, it is the day of the session where I get to implement my first DL algorithm from scratch. It is a simple feed-forward neural network with only one hidden layer implemented using `numpy`. The objective is to train the neural network to recognize handwritten digits from images. The dataset to be used to achieve this is called `MNIST`. I presumed that the training would take a long time since the neural network has to figure out how to recognize the digits by itself. But, it took hardly 2 minutes! I could not believe my eyes when I saw the results. One of the simplest DL algorithms is successful in recognizing 99% of the digits accurately. I didn't have to provide any explicit instructions to do the task. I simply had to provide image and digit pairs to the algorithm and it figured out a way to recognize the digits. My earlier belief that intelligence cannot be created in a computer was shattered at that moment. How naive was I? 🤦🏻‍♂️ After a few minutes, I realized I had fallen in love with DL. 😍

For all the remaining sessions, my interest and attention levels were at an all-time high. I learned many DL algorithms such as convolutional neural networks (CNN), recurrent neural networks (RNN), gated recurrent units (GRU), and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and I even got a sneak peek of recent developments such as transformers which are not part of the course. By the end of the course, I became a deep learning enthusiast even though I didn't know what deep learning meant when the course began.

I found my goal. I wanted to learn even more. In fact, I didn't want to limit myself to deep learning. I wanted to expand the horizon of my knowledge and learn other areas of AI as well. Thus began my search for an appropriate course/program. I found [CDAC's post-graduate diploma in AI](https://www.cdac.in/index.aspx?id=DAC&courseid=30) program to be suitable for me and joined that program. That's how my journey into AI/ML has started.

Thank you, Prof [Mitesh Khapra](https://in.linkedin.com/in/mitesh-khapra-3bb3032) and Prof [Pratyush Kumar](https://in.linkedin.com/in/pratyush-kumar-8844a8a3) for initiating the affordable deep learning course and pushing me into AI/ML world.
